index.markdown, before:

---
# Feel free to add content and custom Front Matter to this file.
# To modify the layout, see https://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults

layout: default
---
Hi there! I'm Sam, a PhD candidate in the [Theory of Computation Group](https://theory.cs.columbia.edu/) at [Columbia University](https://www.columbia.edu/), where I am extremely fortunate to be advised by [Daniel Hsu](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~djhsu/) and [Jeannette Wing](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~wing/). I was also an undergraduate at Columbia, where I double majored in computer science and philosophy. For philosophy, I worked with the inimitable [Achille Varzi](https://www.columbia.edu/~av72/), who advised my senior thesis on [Methodological Blind Spots in Machine Learning Fairness](/assets/senior_thesis.pdf) and [irrevocably changed my view on donuts](https://youtu.be/2nu-7asEy0U?si=gTmkjrGWepHCQhwq). 

My broad research areas are: algorithmic statistics, machine learning theory, and online learning. A bit more specifically, my research focuses on statistical learning in settings where one cares about learning not just on *average* over a population, but on a (potentially very large) number of overlapping subgroups of the population. Such *multi-group* considerations can be captured in formalizations such as *multicalibration* or *multi-group PAC learning*, and they are meant to model problems that have more complex desiderata such as fairness or robustness. I also like thinking about online learning, sequential decision-making, and all the [cool theory](https://cesa-bianchi.di.unimi.it/predbook/) that comes out of it.

I'm grateful to have my research supported by the [Avanessians Doctoral Fellowship for Engineering Thought Leaders and Innovators in Data Science](https://datascience.columbia.edu/news/2021/new-avanessians-gift-propels-innovation-in-engineering-and-data-science/) and my teaching in the summers of 2024 and 2025 supported by a SEAS Doctoral Teaching Fellowship. In the Fall of 2024, I was a visiting student at the Simons program on [Modern Paradigms of Generalization](https://simons.berkeley.edu/programs/modern-paradigms-generalization) at Berkeley.

## Research
[Mathematics for Machine Learning: A Bridge Course](/assets/sigcse25.pdf)<br>
Samuel Deng.<br>
*Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE TS),* 2025.<br>
[Poster](/assets/poster_math4ml.pdf)

[Group-wise oracle-efficient algorithms for online multi-group learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.05287)<br>
Samuel Deng, Daniel Hsu, and Jingwen Liu.<br>
*Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),* 2024.
[Poster](/assets/poster_oracle.pdf)

[Multi-group Learning for Hierarchical Groups](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00258)<br>
Samuel Deng and Daniel Hsu.<br>
*International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),* 2024.
[Poster](/assets/poster_hierarch.pdf)

[Learning Tensor Representations for Meta-Learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07348).<br>
Samuel Deng, Yilin Guo, Daniel Hsu, Debmalya Mandal.<br>
*International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),* 2022.

[A Separation Result Between Data-oblivious and Data-aware Poisoning Attacks.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.12020)<br>
Samuel Deng, Sanjam Garg, Somesh Jha, Saeed Mahloujifar, Mohammad Mahmoody, Abhradeep Thakurta.<br>
*Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),* 2021.

[An Attack on InstaHide: Is Private Learning Possible with Instance Encoding?](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.05315)<br>
Nicholas Carlini, Samuel Deng, Sanjam Garg, Somesh Jha, Saeed Mahloujifar, Mohammad Mahmoody, Shuang Song, Abhradeep Thakurta, Florian Tramèr.<br>
*IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Oakland),* 2021.

[Ensuring Fairness Beyond the Training Data.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.06029)<br>
Debmalya Mandal, Samuel Deng, Suman Jana, Jeannette Wing, Daniel Hsu.<br>
*Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),* 2020.

[Biased Programmers? Or Biased Data? A Field Experiment on Operationalizing AI Ethics.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.02394)<br>
Bo Cowgill, Fabrizio Dell'Acqua, Samuel Deng, Daniel Hsu, Nakul Verma, Augustin Chaintreau.<br>
*21st ACM Conference on Economics and Computation,* 2020.

[Methodological Blind Spots in Machine Learning Fairness: Lessons from the Philosophy of Science and Computer Science](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.14210)<br>
Samuel Deng, Achille Varzi.<br>
*NeurIPS Workshop on Human-Centric Machine Learning,* 2019.<br>
Undergraduate Senior Thesis, 2019. [full pdf](/assets/senior_thesis.pdf)

## Teaching
**Teaching Philosophy.** I *really* love teaching, and I am passionate about continuously developing as a teacher. My [teaching philosophy](/assets/teaching_statement_short.pdf) centers around three core principles:
1. A driving and cohesive narrative should propel all parts of a course.
2. Ideas should be presented as if the student could’ve discovered them themselves.
3. An instructor should never forget how they first struggled when learning the same ideas.

I've also constructed a draft [teaching portfolio](/assets/teaching_portfolio_highres.pdf) that compiles all the feedback I've received thus far on my teaching and dives into how I try to practice this philosophy with several representative artifacts. This is a work in progress; it'll eventually be another part of my website (not a clunky 40 MB document!)

**Some Teaching Experience.** In Summer 2024, I created and taught [*Mathematics for Machine Learning*](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su25/) from scratch, a bridge course for Columbia CS students to strengthen mathematical foundations for studying machine learning. See the link for the course materials, which are all public. [Here's a bit on why I made this course](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su24/assets/files/rationale.pdf) (tldr: when I took machine learning, I had no idea what an expectation was). The course has since been added to Columbia's official Computer Science curriculum, and I presented a [poster on this course](/assets/poster_math4ml.pdf) at SIGCSE TS 2025. Access to the course materials are available online:

- [Mathematics for Machine Learning Summer 2025](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su25/) (currently ongoing).
- [Mathematics for Machine Learning Summer 2024](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su24/) (ran from July 1st to August 9th, 2024).

On the teaching front, I've also had the pleasure of:
- Participating in Columbia's [Center for Teaching and Learning (CTL) Teaching Development Program](https://ctl.columbia.edu/), a multiyear certification program for students to cultivate, document, and reflect on the development of their teaching throughout their Ph.D.
- Serving as Head TA for Daniel Hsu's *Computational Linear Algebra*, Fall 2022. [(course webpage)](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~djhsu/coms3251-f22/) Delivered a [guest lecture on eigenvectors and eigenvalues](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hpa2rl4Euyo&list=PLNm9W-YkOtpOtQmFxmw9MzARpHqAPHLxd&index=6) as part of an observation for CTL's Foundation Track program (12/01/2022), as well as [weekly recitations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lOADPrhy8nI&list=PLNm9W-YkOtpOtQmFxmw9MzARpHqAPHLxd&index=8&t=1s).
- Serving as an Instructor for Christos Papadimitriou and John Morrison's *Natural and Artificial Neural Networks Lab*, Spring 2022. My co-instructor, [Clayton Sanford](https://claytonsanford.com/), and I designed the companion course from scratch: [all materials are available here](https://samuel-deng.github.io/coms4995-nat-art-neural-nets).
- Serving as a Teaching Assistant Fellow and Head Teaching Assistant during my M.S. for *Machine Learning* and *Discrete Mathematics,* where I was awarded the Andrew P. Kosoresow Award for Excellence in Teaching.
- Serving as a TA for *Machine Learning* and *Discrete Mathematics* as an undergraduate at Columbia.

## Service
Alongside Hadleigh Schwartz, I am currently Ph.D coordinator for Columbia's [Emerging Scholars Program (ESP)](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/esp/), a peer-taught, discussion-based seminar course for first and second-year CS students focused on group problem-solving, collaboration, and introducing beginning computer scientists to the breadth of the subject. Please reach out if you'd like to learn more about this program!

For the broader scientific community, I have also served as a reviewer for: NeurIPS 2024 (Top Reviewer), ICLR 2025, ICML 2025.

## Miscellaneous
I also like long-distance running, fiddling around poorly on the guitar, nerding out about [b](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Brothers_Karamazov)[o](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flatland)[o](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicomachean_Ethics)[k](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/25/books/review/stay-true-hua-hsu.html)[s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lincoln_in_the_Bardo) and [mo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FWG3Dfss3Jc)[vi](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2VeLN3IDjzQ)[es](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rph_1DODXDU)[,](/assets/vig.JPG)  and [a good burrito](https://www.calitacos.com/).

Commit message:

Add link to M4ML Summer 2025

index.markdown, after:

---
# Feel free to add content and custom Front Matter to this file.
# To modify the layout, see https://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults

layout: default
---
Hi there! I'm Sam, a PhD candidate in the [Theory of Computation Group](https://theory.cs.columbia.edu/) at [Columbia University](https://www.columbia.edu/), where I am extremely fortunate to be advised by [Daniel Hsu](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~djhsu/) and [Jeannette Wing](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~wing/). I was also an undergraduate at Columbia, where I double majored in computer science and philosophy. For philosophy, I worked with the inimitable [Achille Varzi](https://www.columbia.edu/~av72/), who advised my senior thesis on [Methodological Blind Spots in Machine Learning Fairness](/assets/senior_thesis.pdf) and [irrevocably changed my view on donuts](https://youtu.be/2nu-7asEy0U?si=gTmkjrGWepHCQhwq). 

My broad research areas are: algorithmic statistics, machine learning theory, and online learning. A bit more specifically, my research focuses on statistical learning in settings where one cares about learning not just on *average* over a population, but on a (potentially very large) number of overlapping subgroups of the population. Such *multi-group* considerations can be captured in formalizations such as *multicalibration* or *multi-group PAC learning*, and they are meant to model problems that have more complex desiderata such as fairness or robustness. I also like thinking about online learning, sequential decision-making, and all the [cool theory](https://cesa-bianchi.di.unimi.it/predbook/) that comes out of it.

I'm grateful to have my research supported by the [Avanessians Doctoral Fellowship for Engineering Thought Leaders and Innovators in Data Science](https://datascience.columbia.edu/news/2021/new-avanessians-gift-propels-innovation-in-engineering-and-data-science/) and my teaching in the summers of 2024 and 2025 supported by a SEAS Doctoral Teaching Fellowship. In the Fall of 2024, I was a visiting student at the Simons program on [Modern Paradigms of Generalization](https://simons.berkeley.edu/programs/modern-paradigms-generalization) at Berkeley.

In Summer A 2025, I am teaching [Mathematics for Machine Learning](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su25/).

## Research
[Mathematics for Machine Learning: A Bridge Course](/assets/sigcse25.pdf)<br>
Samuel Deng.<br>
*Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE TS),* 2025.<br>
[Poster](/assets/poster_math4ml.pdf)

[Group-wise oracle-efficient algorithms for online multi-group learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.05287)<br>
Samuel Deng, Daniel Hsu, and Jingwen Liu.<br>
*Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),* 2024.
[Poster](/assets/poster_oracle.pdf)

[Multi-group Learning for Hierarchical Groups](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00258)<br>
Samuel Deng and Daniel Hsu.<br>
*International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),* 2024.
[Poster](/assets/poster_hierarch.pdf)

[Learning Tensor Representations for Meta-Learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07348).<br>
Samuel Deng, Yilin Guo, Daniel Hsu, Debmalya Mandal.<br>
*International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),* 2022.

[A Separation Result Between Data-oblivious and Data-aware Poisoning Attacks.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.12020)<br>
Samuel Deng, Sanjam Garg, Somesh Jha, Saeed Mahloujifar, Mohammad Mahmoody, Abhradeep Thakurta.<br>
*Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),* 2021.

[An Attack on InstaHide: Is Private Learning Possible with Instance Encoding?](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.05315)<br>
Nicholas Carlini, Samuel Deng, Sanjam Garg, Somesh Jha, Saeed Mahloujifar, Mohammad Mahmoody, Shuang Song, Abhradeep Thakurta, Florian Tramèr.<br>
*IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Oakland),* 2021.

[Ensuring Fairness Beyond the Training Data.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.06029)<br>
Debmalya Mandal, Samuel Deng, Suman Jana, Jeannette Wing, Daniel Hsu.<br>
*Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),* 2020.

[Biased Programmers? Or Biased Data? A Field Experiment on Operationalizing AI Ethics.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.02394)<br>
Bo Cowgill, Fabrizio Dell'Acqua, Samuel Deng, Daniel Hsu, Nakul Verma, Augustin Chaintreau.<br>
*21st ACM Conference on Economics and Computation,* 2020.

[Methodological Blind Spots in Machine Learning Fairness: Lessons from the Philosophy of Science and Computer Science](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.14210)<br>
Samuel Deng, Achille Varzi.<br>
*NeurIPS Workshop on Human-Centric Machine Learning,* 2019.<br>
Undergraduate Senior Thesis, 2019. [full pdf](/assets/senior_thesis.pdf)

## Teaching
**Teaching Philosophy.** I *really* love teaching, and I am passionate about continuously developing as a teacher. My [teaching philosophy](/assets/teaching_statement_short.pdf) centers around three core principles:
1. A driving and cohesive narrative should propel all parts of a course.
2. Ideas should be presented as if the student could’ve discovered them themselves.
3. An instructor should never forget how they first struggled when learning the same ideas.

I've also constructed a draft [teaching portfolio](/assets/teaching_portfolio_highres.pdf) that compiles all the feedback I've received thus far on my teaching and dives into how I try to practice this philosophy with several representative artifacts. This is a work in progress; it'll eventually be another part of my website (not a clunky 40 MB document!)

**Some Teaching Experience.** In Summer 2024, I created and taught [*Mathematics for Machine Learning*](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su25/) from scratch, a bridge course for Columbia CS students to strengthen mathematical foundations for studying machine learning. See the link for the course materials, which are all public. [Here's a bit on why I made this course](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su24/assets/files/rationale.pdf) (tldr: when I took machine learning, I had no idea what an expectation was). The course has since been added to Columbia's official Computer Science curriculum, and I presented a [poster on this course](/assets/poster_math4ml.pdf) at SIGCSE TS 2025. Access to the course materials are available online:

- [Mathematics for Machine Learning Summer 2025](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su25/) (currently ongoing).
- [Mathematics for Machine Learning Summer 2024](https://samuel-deng.github.io/math4ml_su24/) (ran from July 1st to August 9th, 2024).

On the teaching front, I've also had the pleasure of:
- Participating in Columbia's [Center for Teaching and Learning (CTL) Teaching Development Program](https://ctl.columbia.edu/), a multiyear certification program for students to cultivate, document, and reflect on the development of their teaching throughout their Ph.D.
- Serving as Head TA for Daniel Hsu's *Computational Linear Algebra*, Fall 2022. [(course webpage)](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~djhsu/coms3251-f22/) Delivered a [guest lecture on eigenvectors and eigenvalues](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hpa2rl4Euyo&list=PLNm9W-YkOtpOtQmFxmw9MzARpHqAPHLxd&index=6) as part of an observation for CTL's Foundation Track program (12/01/2022), as well as [weekly recitations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lOADPrhy8nI&list=PLNm9W-YkOtpOtQmFxmw9MzARpHqAPHLxd&index=8&t=1s).
- Serving as an Instructor for Christos Papadimitriou and John Morrison's *Natural and Artificial Neural Networks Lab*, Spring 2022. My co-instructor, [Clayton Sanford](https://claytonsanford.com/), and I designed the companion course from scratch: [all materials are available here](https://samuel-deng.github.io/coms4995-nat-art-neural-nets).
- Serving as a Teaching Assistant Fellow and Head Teaching Assistant during my M.S. for *Machine Learning* and *Discrete Mathematics,* where I was awarded the Andrew P. Kosoresow Award for Excellence in Teaching.
- Serving as a TA for *Machine Learning* and *Discrete Mathematics* as an undergraduate at Columbia.

## Service
Alongside Hadleigh Schwartz, I am currently Ph.D coordinator for Columbia's [Emerging Scholars Program (ESP)](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/esp/), a peer-taught, discussion-based seminar course for first and second-year CS students focused on group problem-solving, collaboration, and introducing beginning computer scientists to the breadth of the subject. Please reach out if you'd like to learn more about this program!

For the broader scientific community, I have also served as a reviewer for: NeurIPS 2024 (Top Reviewer), ICLR 2025, ICML 2025.

## Miscellaneous
I also like long-distance running, fiddling around poorly on the guitar, nerding out about [b](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Brothers_Karamazov)[o](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flatland)[o](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicomachean_Ethics)[k](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/25/books/review/stay-true-hua-hsu.html)[s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lincoln_in_the_Bardo) and [mo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FWG3Dfss3Jc)[vi](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2VeLN3IDjzQ)[es](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rph_1DODXDU)[,](/assets/vig.JPG)  and [a good burrito](https://www.calitacos.com/).
